TROUBLESHOOTING.md, before:

# Troubleshooting Guide

## Common Issues

### Module Not Found: 'moshi'

**Symptom:** When running `python -m moshi.server`, you get:
```
ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'moshi'
```

**Root Cause:** The conda environment is not activated, or moshi is not installed in the active environment.

**Solution:**

1. Activate the conda environment:
   ```bash
   conda activate personaplex
   ```

2. Verify the environment is active (you should see `(personaplex)` in your prompt):
   ```bash
   conda info --envs
   # Should show * next to personaplex
   ```

3. If moshi is not installed, install it:
   ```bash
   cd moshi
   pip install -e .
   cd ..
   ```

4. Try running the server again:
   ```bash
   SSL_DIR=$(mktemp -d); python -m moshi.server --ssl "$SSL_DIR"
   ```

**Prevention:** Always activate the conda environment before running PersonaPlex commands. Add a reminder to your workflow or shell configuration.

## Development Issues

### Code Changes Not Reflected When Running Server

**Symptom:** You made changes to backend code (e.g., added new endpoints, modified routes), but when you restart the server with `python -m moshi.server`, the changes don't appear. New API endpoints return 404, and debug logging doesn't show up.

**Root Cause:** The moshi-personaplex package was installed in regular mode (`pip install .`) instead of editable mode (`pip install -e .`). When installed normally, pip copies the code to site-packages (e.g., `/path/to/envs/personaplex/lib/python3.10/site-packages/moshi`), and Python loads from there instead of your source directory.

**Solution:**

1. Check if the package is installed:
   ```bash
   pip list | grep moshi
   ```

2. Check installation location:
   ```bash
   pip show moshi-personaplex
   ```

   If `Location` shows `site-packages`, it's not in editable mode.

3. Uninstall and reinstall in editable mode:
   ```bash
   pip uninstall -y moshi-personaplex
   cd moshi
   pip install -e .
   ```

4. Verify editable install:
   ```bash
   pip show moshi-personaplex
   ```

   The `Location` should show something like `/path/to/repo/moshi` instead of `site-packages`.

5. Restart the server:
   ```bash
   python -m moshi.server
   ```

**Prevention:** Always use `pip install -e .` (with the `-e` flag) when installing packages for development.

## Server Issues

### Custom UI Not Loading (Server Uses Default UI)

**Symptom:** You've modified the frontend (client/ directory), rebuilt it, but when you start the server, your changes don't appear.

**Root Cause:** The `client/dist` directory doesn't exist or is empty. The server auto-detects custom UI by checking if `client/dist` exists.

**Solution:**

1. **Verify the build exists:**
   ```bash
   ls -la client/dist/
   ```
   If this directory doesn't exist or is empty, you need to build the frontend first.

2. **Build the frontend:**
   ```bash
   cd client
   npm install  # If you haven't already
   npm run build
   cd ..
   ```

3. **Restart the server** (it will now auto-detect the custom UI):
   ```bash
   conda activate personaplex
   SSL_DIR=$(mktemp -d); python -m moshi.server --ssl "$SSL_DIR"
   ```

4. **Verify auto-detection worked** by checking the logs:
   ```
   # SUCCESS - Custom UI detected:
   Found custom UI at .../client/dist, using it instead of default
   static_path = /home/.../personaplex-blackwell/client/dist

   # FAIL - No custom UI found:
   retrieving the static content
   static_path = /home/.../.cache/huggingface/.../dist
   ```

5. Hard refresh your browser (Ctrl+Shift+R or Cmd+Shift+R) to clear cached assets

**When auto-detection won't work:**
- `client/dist` directory doesn't exist
- `client/dist` exists but is empty
- Permissions prevent reading the directory

**Manual override (if needed):**
If auto-detection fails but you know the build exists, use the `--static` flag:
```bash
SSL_DIR=$(mktemp -d); python -m moshi.server --ssl "$SSL_DIR" --static client/dist
```

**Development tip:**
After making frontend changes, rebuild and the server will auto-detect:
```bash
cd client && npm run build && cd ..
# Restart server - custom UI detected automatically!
```

### Server Returns 404 for API Endpoints

If specific API endpoints return 404:

1. Check if routes are registered correctly by looking for debug logging at server startup
2. Verify the package is installed in editable mode (see above)
3. Check that static routes are registered AFTER API routes in server.py
4. Clear Python cache and restart:
   ```bash
   find moshi -type f -name '*.pyc' -delete
   find moshi -type d -name '__pycache__' -exec rm -rf {} + 2>/dev/null
   python -m moshi.server
   ```

### Build Directory Conflicts

If you suspect the `moshi/build/` directory contains old code:

1. Move it out of the way:
   ```bash
   mv moshi/build moshi/build.bak
   ```

2. Clear Python cache:
   ```bash
   find moshi -type f -name '*.pyc' -delete
   find moshi -type d -name '__pycache__' -exec rm -rf {} + 2>/dev/null
   ```

3. Restart the server

## Frontend Issues

### Frontend Not Showing New Features

If you modified React components but don't see changes:

1. Rebuild the frontend:
   ```bash
   cd client
   npm run build
   ```

2. Restart the server (it serves the static files from client/dist)

3. Hard refresh your browser (Ctrl+Shift+R or Cmd+Shift+R)

### Voice Dropdown Shows "Error loading voices"

1. Check if the server is running:
   ```bash
   ps aux | grep moshi.server
   ```

2. Test the API endpoint directly:
   ```bash
   curl http://localhost:8998/api/voices
   ```

3. Check server logs for errors

4. Verify VoiceDiscovery can find voice files:
   ```bash
   python -c "from moshi.voice_discovery import VoiceDiscovery; print(len(VoiceDiscovery.list_voices()))"
   ```

## Environment Issues

### Missing HuggingFace Token

If models fail to download:

1. Set your HuggingFace token as an environment variable:
   ```bash
   export HF_TOKEN=your_token_here
   ```
2. Or use the Hugging Face CLI:
   ```bash
   pip install huggingface_hub
   huggingface-cli login
   ```

### ffmpeg Not Found

If voice generation fails with "Command 'ffmpeg' not found":

```bash
sudo apt install ffmpeg  # Ubuntu/Debian
brew install ffmpeg      # macOS
```

## Getting Help

If you encounter issues not covered here:

1. Check the README.md for setup instructions
2. Review recent commits for breaking changes
3. Open an issue at https://github.com/nvidia/personaplex-7b-v1/issues with:
   - Your environment (OS, Python version, conda/venv)
   - Steps to reproduce the issue
   - Complete error messages and logs

Commit message:

Add .env file support for easier token management
- Add .env.example template with HF_TOKEN and CUSTOM_VOICE_DIR
- Update documentation to recommend .env file as primary method
- .env files are automatically loaded by server and offline scripts
- Maintains backward compatibility with export and huggingface-cli methods

Benefits of .env over export will be explained in PR description.

TROUBLESHOOTING.md, after:

# Troubleshooting Guide

## Common Issues

### Module Not Found: 'moshi'

**Symptom:** When running `python -m moshi.server`, you get:
```
ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'moshi'
```

**Root Cause:** The conda environment is not activated, or moshi is not installed in the active environment.

**Solution:**

1. Activate the conda environment:
   ```bash
   conda activate personaplex
   ```

2. Verify the environment is active (you should see `(personaplex)` in your prompt):
   ```bash
   conda info --envs
   # Should show * next to personaplex
   ```

3. If moshi is not installed, install it:
   ```bash
   cd moshi
   pip install -e .
   cd ..
   ```

4. Try running the server again:
   ```bash
   SSL_DIR=$(mktemp -d); python -m moshi.server --ssl "$SSL_DIR"
   ```

**Prevention:** Always activate the conda environment before running PersonaPlex commands. Add a reminder to your workflow or shell configuration.

## Development Issues

### Code Changes Not Reflected When Running Server

**Symptom:** You made changes to backend code (e.g., added new endpoints, modified routes), but when you restart the server with `python -m moshi.server`, the changes don't appear. New API endpoints return 404, and debug logging doesn't show up.

**Root Cause:** The moshi-personaplex package was installed in regular mode (`pip install .`) instead of editable mode (`pip install -e .`). When installed normally, pip copies the code to site-packages (e.g., `/path/to/envs/personaplex/lib/python3.10/site-packages/moshi`), and Python loads from there instead of your source directory.

**Solution:**

1. Check if the package is installed:
   ```bash
   pip list | grep moshi
   ```

2. Check installation location:
   ```bash
   pip show moshi-personaplex
   ```

   If `Location` shows `site-packages`, it's not in editable mode.

3. Uninstall and reinstall in editable mode:
   ```bash
   pip uninstall -y moshi-personaplex
   cd moshi
   pip install -e .
   ```

4. Verify editable install:
   ```bash
   pip show moshi-personaplex
   ```

   The `Location` should show something like `/path/to/repo/moshi` instead of `site-packages`.

5. Restart the server:
   ```bash
   python -m moshi.server
   ```

**Prevention:** Always use `pip install -e .` (with the `-e` flag) when installing packages for development.

## Server Issues

### Custom UI Not Loading (Server Uses Default UI)

**Symptom:** You've modified the frontend (client/ directory), rebuilt it, but when you start the server, your changes don't appear.

**Root Cause:** The `client/dist` directory doesn't exist or is empty. The server auto-detects custom UI by checking if `client/dist` exists.

**Solution:**

1. **Verify the build exists:**
   ```bash
   ls -la client/dist/
   ```
   If this directory doesn't exist or is empty, you need to build the frontend first.

2. **Build the frontend:**
   ```bash
   cd client
   npm install  # If you haven't already
   npm run build
   cd ..
   ```

3. **Restart the server** (it will now auto-detect the custom UI):
   ```bash
   conda activate personaplex
   SSL_DIR=$(mktemp -d); python -m moshi.server --ssl "$SSL_DIR"
   ```

4. **Verify auto-detection worked** by checking the logs:
   ```
   # SUCCESS - Custom UI detected:
   Found custom UI at .../client/dist, using it instead of default
   static_path = /home/.../personaplex-blackwell/client/dist

   # FAIL - No custom UI found:
   retrieving the static content
   static_path = /home/.../.cache/huggingface/.../dist
   ```

5. Hard refresh your browser (Ctrl+Shift+R or Cmd+Shift+R) to clear cached assets

**When auto-detection won't work:**
- `client/dist` directory doesn't exist
- `client/dist` exists but is empty
- Permissions prevent reading the directory

**Manual override (if needed):**
If auto-detection fails but you know the build exists, use the `--static` flag:
```bash
SSL_DIR=$(mktemp -d); python -m moshi.server --ssl "$SSL_DIR" --static client/dist
```

**Development tip:**
After making frontend changes, rebuild and the server will auto-detect:
```bash
cd client && npm run build && cd ..
# Restart server - custom UI detected automatically!
```

### Server Returns 404 for API Endpoints

If specific API endpoints return 404:

1. Check if routes are registered correctly by looking for debug logging at server startup
2. Verify the package is installed in editable mode (see above)
3. Check that static routes are registered AFTER API routes in server.py
4. Clear Python cache and restart:
   ```bash
   find moshi -type f -name '*.pyc' -delete
   find moshi -type d -name '__pycache__' -exec rm -rf {} + 2>/dev/null
   python -m moshi.server
   ```

### Build Directory Conflicts

If you suspect the `moshi/build/` directory contains old code:

1. Move it out of the way:
   ```bash
   mv moshi/build moshi/build.bak
   ```

2. Clear Python cache:
   ```bash
   find moshi -type f -name '*.pyc' -delete
   find moshi -type d -name '__pycache__' -exec rm -rf {} + 2>/dev/null
   ```

3. Restart the server

## Frontend Issues

### Frontend Not Showing New Features

If you modified React components but don't see changes:

1. Rebuild the frontend:
   ```bash
   cd client
   npm run build
   ```

2. Restart the server (it serves the static files from client/dist)

3. Hard refresh your browser (Ctrl+Shift+R or Cmd+Shift+R)

### Voice Dropdown Shows "Error loading voices"

1. Check if the server is running:
   ```bash
   ps aux | grep moshi.server
   ```

2. Test the API endpoint directly:
   ```bash
   curl http://localhost:8998/api/voices
   ```

3. Check server logs for errors

4. Verify VoiceDiscovery can find voice files:
   ```bash
   python -c "from moshi.voice_discovery import VoiceDiscovery; print(len(VoiceDiscovery.list_voices()))"
   ```

## Environment Issues

### Missing HuggingFace Token

If models fail to download:

1. Create a `.env` file in the repository root:
   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   # Edit .env and add your token: HF_TOKEN=your_token_here
   ```
2. Or set environment variable:
   ```bash
   export HF_TOKEN=your_token_here
   ```
3. Or use the Hugging Face CLI:
   ```bash
   pip install huggingface_hub
   huggingface-cli login
   ```

### ffmpeg Not Found

If voice generation fails with "Command 'ffmpeg' not found":

```bash
sudo apt install ffmpeg  # Ubuntu/Debian
brew install ffmpeg      # macOS
```

## Getting Help

If you encounter issues not covered here:

1. Check the README.md for setup instructions
2. Review recent commits for breaking changes
3. Open an issue at https://github.com/nvidia/personaplex-7b-v1/issues with:
   - Your environment (OS, Python version, conda/venv)
   - Steps to reproduce the issue
   - Complete error messages and logs
